# Project: Data Warehouse

### Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In order for analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to, I will build an ETL pipeline that extract the data from S3, stages them in Redshift and transform data into a set of dimentional tables. 


### Project Description

In this project, I will build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. I will load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.



# Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the  [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

```

# Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this  [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim)  based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```


# Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and event datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table

1.  **songplays**  - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page  `NextSong`
    -   _songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent_

#### Dimension Tables

2.  **users**  - users in the app
    -   _user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level_
3.  **songs**  - songs in music database
    -   _song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration_
4.  **artists**  - artists in music database
    -   _artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude_
5.  **time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
    -   _start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday_


# How to Run the project

The project needs to be  after Redshift cluster become available 

The ETL piplelines to follow below order

To create tables:
```
python3 create_tables.py
```
To fill tables via ETL:
```
python3 etl.py
```


# Files in the repository

-   **create_tables.py**: Script to drop and create tables
-   **sql_queries.py**: Script SQL-Statements used by create_tables.py and etl.py

-   **dw.cfg**: config file to add redshift database and IAM role info
- **MISC**: Folder containing the test script 
- **redshift cluster** Folder contains script to create, test and destroy redshift cluster
