# Project:  Data Lake

### Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

 I will build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

I'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.


### Project Description

In this project, I'll  build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. I will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. You'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.



# Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the  [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

```

# Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this  [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim)  based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```


# Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and event datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table

1.  **songplays**  - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page  `NextSong`
    -   _songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent_

#### Dimension Tables

2.  **users**  - users in the app
    -   _user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level_
3.  **songs**  - songs in music database
    -   _song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration_
4.  **artists**  - artists in music database
    -   _artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude_
5.  **time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
    -   _start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday_


# How to Run the project

The project will run on AWS EMR cluster and need to create S3 bucket for output data


To run the ETL pipeline:
```
python3 etl.py
```



# Files in the repository

-   **etl.py**:  reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3
-   **dw.cfg**: contains your AWS credentials
- **Data**: The sample dataset
